---
layout: post
title: "Software Quality Award, 2021"
date: 2020-11-15
place: Moscow, Russia
tags: award
description: |
  A software quality award, recognizing the
  most disciplined and properly organized
  open source project; year 2019.
image: /images/andreea/quality-award.png
keywords:
  - best open source projects
  - open source donation
  - get donation for open source
  - open source award
  - open source project award
noindex: true
---

{% badge /images/andreea/quality-award.svg 300 %}

This is the _seventh_ year of the
[Software Quality Award](/award.html). The maximum prize
is still the same---**$4,096**.
The rules are still the same. Read on.
Previous years are here:
[2015]({% pst 2015/apr/2015-04-16-award %}),
[2016]({% pst 2015/oct/2015-10-17-award-2016 %}),
[2017]({% pst 2016/oct/2016-10-23-award-2017 %}),
[2018]({% pst 2017/oct/2017-10-24-award-2018 %}),
[2019]({% pst 2018/sep/2018-09-30-award-2019 %}),
[2020]({% pst 2019/nov/2019-11-03-award-2020 %}).

<!--more-->

Here is [**the form**](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/1mf0IGryvAhUnIbbhemXPSbIXxE21e190MyQdKuEY_zw)
to fill out.

Rules:

  * One person can submit only one project.

  * Submissions are accepted until September 1, 2021.

  * I will check the commit history to make sure you're the main contributor to the project.

  * I reserve the right to reject any submission without explanation.

  * All submissions will be published on this page (including rejected ones).

  * Results will be announced October 15, 2021 on this page and by email (or maybe a bit later).

  * The best project will receive $4,096
    (I may split this amount among a few projects and may give away a smaller amount!).

  * Final decisions will be made by me and are not negotiable
    (although I may invite other people to help me make the right decision).

  * Winners that received any cash prizes in previous years can't submit again.

{% youtube Z70PMGaxGhY %}

Each project must be:

  * Open source (in GitHub).

  * At least 4,096 lines of code ([`cloc`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/cloc) without any arguments)
    _and_ at least 16,384 [hits-of-code]({% pst 2014/nov/2014-11-14-hits-of-code %}).

  * At least one year old (the age of the first commit).

  * Object-oriented (that's the only thing I understand).

The best project is selected using this [criteria]({% pst 2015/jun/2015-06-08-deadly-sins-software-project %}).

What doesn't matter:

  * Popularity. Even if nobody is using your
    product, it is still eligible for this award. I don't care about
    popularity; quality is the key.

  * Programming language. I believe that any language, used correctly,
    can be applied to design a high-quality product.

  * Buzz and trends. Even if your project is yet another parser of command
    line arguments, it's still eligible for the award. I don't care about
    your marketing position; quality is all.

By the way, if you want to sponsor this award and increase the bonus,
[email me](mailto:me@yegor256.com).

