---
# SPDX-FileCopyrightText: Copyright (c) 2014-2026 Yegor Bugayenko
# SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT

layout: post
title: "MVC vs. OOP"
date: 2016-12-13
tags: oop java
place: Kyiv, Ukraine
description: |
  MVC is a very popular architectural design pattern
  that goes absolutely against the spirit of object-oriented
  programming.
keywords:
  - mvc
  - mvc design pattern
  - mvc in java
  - mvc java
  - mvc design pattern in java
social:
  - dzone: https://dzone.com/articles/mvc-vs-oop
book: elegant-objects-2 6.2
image: /images/2016/12/hot-shots.jpg
jb_picture:
  caption: Hot Shots! (1991) by Jim Abrahams
---

[Model-View-Controller](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Model%E2%80%93view%E2%80%93controller)
(MVC) is an architectural pattern we all are well aware of.
It's a de-facto standard for almost all UI and
[Web frameworks](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_framework). It is convenient
and easy to use. It is simple and effective. It is a great concept ...
for a procedural programmer. If your software is object-oriented, you
should dislike MVC as much as I do. Here is why.

<!--more-->

{% jb_picture_body %}

This is how MVC architecture looks:

{% plantuml style="width:35%" %}
[Controller] -down- [Model]
[Controller] -down- [View]
{% endplantuml %}

Controller is _in charge_, taking care of the data received from Model
and injecting it into View---and this is exactly the problem. The data escapes
the Model and becomes "[naked]({% pst 2016/nov/2016-11-21-naked-data %})," which is a big problem, as we
[agreed earlier]({% pst 2016/nov/2016-11-21-naked-data %}).
OOP is all about encapsulation---data hiding.

MVC architecture does exactly the opposite by _exposing_ the data and hiding
behavior. The controller deals with the data directly, making decisions about
its purpose and properties, while the objects, which are supposed to know
everything about the data and hide it, remain [anemic]({% pst 2016/jul/2016-07-06-data-transfer-object %}).
That is exactly the principle any procedural architecture is built upon; the
code is in charge of the data. Take this C++ code, for example:

```c
void print_speed() { // controller
  int s = load_from_engine(); // model
  printf("The speed is %d mph", s); // view
}
```

The function `print_speed()` is the controller. It gets the data `s` from
the model `load_from_engine()` and renders it via the view `printf()`. Only
the controller knows that the data is in miles per hour. The engine
returns `int` without any properties. The controller simply assumed that
that data is in mph. If we want to create a similar controller somewhere
else, we will have to make a similar assumption again and again. That's what the
"naked data" problem is about, and it leads to serious maintainability issues.

This is an object-oriented alternative to the code above (pseudo-C++):

```c
printf(
  new PrintedSpeed( // view
    new FormattedSpeed( // controller
      new SpeedFromEngine() // model
    )
  )
);
```

Here, `SpeedFromEngine.speed()`
returns speed in mph, as an integer; `FormattedSpeed.speed()` returns
`"%d mph"`; and finally, `PrintedSpeed.to_str()` returns the full text of the
message. We can call them "model, view, and controller," but in reality they
are just objects decorating each other. It's still the same entity---the speed.
But it gets more complex and intelligent by being decorated.

We don't tear the concept of speed apart. The speed is the speed, no matter
who works with it and where it is presented. It just gets new behavior
from decorators. It grows, but never falls apart.

To summarize, Controller is a pure _procedural_ component in the MVC trio,
which turns Model into a passive data holder and View into
a passive data renderer. The controll<b>er</b>, the hold<b>er</b>,
the render<b>er</b> ...
Is it [really OOP]({% pst 2015/mar/2015-03-09-objects-end-with-er %})?
