---
layout: post
title: "SIMBA: Simplified Management By Artifacts"
date: 2021-09-09
place: Moscow, Russia
tags: management
description: |
  Here is a quick summary of a very simple management
  framework, which I've used in my teams for the last two years.
keywords:
  - management
  - goal setting
  - reporting
  - management reports
  - planning
image: /images/2021/09/lion-king.jpg
jb_picture:
  caption: Lion King (2019) by Jon Favreau
---

Here is a very simple management framework, which we have used in
our teams for the last two years. We came to it experimentally,
trying to merge some Agile principles,
[PMBOK](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Project_Management_Body_of_Knowledge) ideas, and
common sense. Our experience so far is positive, even though
the proposed rules of work are not really about
[project management]({% pst 2016/may/2016-05-24-who-is-project-manager %}),
but more about keeping an eye on the situation and making sure
it's not falling apart. This is the best most
[modern teams]({% pst 2015/jul/2015-07-21-hourly-pay-modern-slavery %})
can afford anyway.

<!--more-->

{% jb_picture_body %}

Each group has a Team Coordinator (TC), who is usually not the most
knowledgeable expert, but someone with good organizational
skills and strong self-discipline. TC is responsible for
four cornerstone elements of our management framework:
1) Plan, 2) Monday Reports, 3) Weekly Calls, and 4) Demos.

## Plan

{% badge /images/2021/09/simba-thinking.svg 128 %}

Our Plan is a very simple text document visible for everybody in the
team, usually in Google Docs, and editable by the TC only.
It is a primitive version of a
[Work Breakdown Structure (WBS)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Work_breakdown_structure)
married with a
[Gantt Chart](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gantt_chart),
where each line is a tangible artifact, like a file, a document,
a software module, a PDF report, and so on. Tasks are not welcome
in the Plan, only artifacts. An example:

```text
- Requirements v1 [Jeff+Bill, 25-Aug, 80%]
- Dataset with 500+ files [Anna+Jeff, 3-Sep, 100%]
- XYZ module deployed [John+Jeff, 14-Sep, 50%]
- Database redesign [Bill+Mary, 27-Sep, 20%]
- ABC package released [Jeff+Mary, 1-Oct, 0%]
- Report on data analysis [Jeff+Anna, 5-Oct, 10%]
```

Each artifact has 1) an owner and 2) a reviewer.
In the first artifact "_Requirements v1_" the owner is Jeff and
the reviewer is Bill. Jeff will make sure the requirements
are delivered, and Bill will check them and confirm.
The owners may not necessarily
be primary contributors to their artifacts, but they are responsible for
keeping the delivery status under control.
Simply put, when an artifact is delivered on time, we _reward_
the owner; when the delivery is missed, we also _blame_ (I know, most of you
don't like this word) the owner.

{% youtube 939ntzufGB0 %}

Each artifact has a planned delivery date. The dates may
change as often as necessary, but at any moment of time
the Plan has to have dates defined for _all_ artifacts.
The list is reverse sorted by dates.

Each artifact has a subjectively measured status of completion,
like "80%" for the first artifact above. The TC collects this
information from reviewers, not owners.

No more than three artifacts may be owned by one person
and no more than four may be reviewed. Thus, anyone
is allowed to keep no more than seven artifacts under control.

## Monday Reports

{% badge /images/2021/09/simba-writing.svg 128 %}

Each Monday morning, the TC sends a report by email
to all team sponsors: a plain-text email without
any attachments or fancy formatting. All stakeholders,
including all team members, are CC-ed too.
An example:

```text
From: Team Coordinator
To: Big Boss
CC: Programmer #1, Programmer #2, Friend #1, etc.
Subject: WEEK13 Dataset, Requirements, XYZ

Hi all,

Last week achievements:
- Added 100 new files to the Dataset [100%]
- Fixed the deployment of XYZ [50%]
- Refined the requirements [80%]
Next week plans:
- To publish ABC package draft
- To review first draft of the report
Risks:
- The server is weak, we may fail the delivery
  of the dataset, report milestone will be missed.

Bye.
```

The **subject** of the email starts with the `WEEK13`, where
13 is the number of the previous calendar week
in the current year. By the way,
there are [52 weeks](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_week_date)
in almost every year.
The `WEEK` part makes report emails easily searchable in the inbox.
There is also a comma-separated list of the most important topics of the report,
to give the reader a quick impression about the results being reported.

Each **achievement** of the last week starts with a verb or a past
tense, like "fixed," "added," "refined" etc. After the verb
the artifact is mentioned, which we contributed to. At the end
of each line there is a progress status, subjectively measured
by the author of the report. There should be no more than seven
achievement points, no matter how big the team is nor how detailed
the Plan. The report must not tell the full story, but only
highlight what's most important.

{% youtube 2IwBc9UI4Sg %}

Wherever possible, each achievement item must be supplemented
with a link leading to a pull request, or a file, or a document.
There has to be something traceable and verifiable: the readers
of the report must be able to find all necessary details for
each item without asking its owner or the author of the report.

Each **task** for a new week starts with a verb in the infinitive
form, like "to publish" or "to review" and then, of course,
the artifact is mentioned. There should be no more than seven
tasks in the list.

Each **risk**, in [Cause-Risk-Effect format]({% pst 2019/may/2019-05-14-cause-risk-effect %}),
is an opportunity for the reporter to protect the team:
the more people knew about risks, the harder it will be to blame
the team for failures, which are inevitable.

## Weekly Calls

{% badge /images/2021/09/simba-listening.svg 128 %}

Every week at the same time and day,
we make a 30-minute Zoom status call: everybody participates.
We look at the Plan and discuss whether our work is still on track.
We ask each other:

  - Will all artifacts delivered mean success?
  - Did we break down the scope correctly?
  - What did we miss in our Plan?
  - Are all owners committed to the their dates and scopes?
  - Are there any risks overlooked?

We _don't_ use status calls for reporting. This is what we have
Monday Reports for.

All decisions we make at status calls we call Meeting Minutes and send by email to everybody (or post in our Telegram group chat).

## Demos

{% badge /images/2021/09/simba-speaking.svg 128 %}

Almost every week we ask some artifact owner to demonstrate his or her
results at a one-hour "demo" Zoom call. Usually it happens when
the delivery date is approaching and an owner is ready to
show something complete. However, demo calls are also very useful
to collect opinions when an artifact is still in progress.

It's the responsibility of a TC to make regular demo calls weekly,
inviting owners of the most important artifacts.

All status calls and demo calls are recorded and posted into
a private list on YouTube, where all team members can watch them
later.
