---
layout: post
title: "Software Quality Award"
date: 2015-04-16
permalink: award.html
tags: mgmt oop
description:
  An award recognizing the most disciplined and properly organized
  open source project; submit your application now.
keywords:
  - best open source projects
  - open source donation
  - get donation for open source
  - open source award
  - open source project award
---

I'm a big fan of rules and discipline in software development; as an example, see
[Are You a Hacker or a Designer?]({% pst 2014/oct/2014-10-26-hacker-vs-programmer-mentality %}).
Also, I'm a big fan of object-oriented programming in its purest form; for example, see
[Seven Virtues of a Good Object]({% pst 2014/nov/2014-11-20-seven-virtues-of-good-object %}).
I'm also a co-founder and the CTO of [Teamed.io](http://www.teamed.io), a software development
company through which I put my admiration of discipline and clean design into practice.

<!--more-->

I want to encourage you to share my passion &mdash; not just by reading this blog
but through making real open source software in a disciplined way.
This award is for those who are brave enough to swim against the current and
value quality above everything else.

Send me your own project for review and participate in the contest.

Rules:

 * One person can submit up to three projects.

 * Submissions are accepted until the **September 1, 2015**.

 * Submissions must be sent via email to [me@yegor256.com](mailto:me@yegor256.com).
   All I need is your Github login and repository name; I will check the commit
   history to make sure you're the main contributor to the project.

 * I reserve the right to reject any submission without explanation.

 * All submissions will be published on this page (including rejected ones).

 * Results will be announced **October 15** on this page and by email.

 * The best project will receive **$4,096**.

 * Final decisions will be made by me and are not negotiable
   (although I may invite other people to help me make the right decision).

Each project must be:

 * Open source.

 * At least 5,000 lines of code.

 * At least one year old.

 * Object-oriented (that's the only thing I understand).

The best projects will feature:

 * Strict and visible principles of design.

 * Continuous delivery.

 * Traceability of changes.

 * Self-documented source code.

 * Strict rules of code formatting.

What doesn't matter:

 * Popularity. Even if nobody is using your
   product, it is still eligible for this award. I don't care about
   popularity; quality is the key.

 * Programming language. I believe that any language, used correctly,
   can be applied to design a high-quality product.

 * Buzz and trends. Even if your project is yet another parser of command
   line arguments, it's still eligible for the award. I don't care about
   your marketing position; quality is all.

By the way, if you want to sponsor this award,
[email me](mailto:me@yegor256.com).

<hr/>

Projects submitted so far (in order of submission):

 * [mdbs99/AWS](https://github.com/mdbs99/AWS)
 * [FagnerMartinsBrack/WebStories](https://github.com/FagnerMartinsBrack/WebStories)
 * [robertop/triumph4php](https://github.com/robertop/triumph4php)
 * [blambeau/wlang](https://github.com/blambeau/wlang)
 * [alf-tool/alf-core](https://github.com/alf-tool/alf-core)
 * [siom79/japicmp](https://github/siom79/japicmp)
