---
layout: post
title: "PhantomJS as an HTML Validator"
date: 2014-04-06
tags: pets testing
description: |
  I created Phandom Java library for generating DOM through Phantomjs,
  this article explains the rationale and the basic use case
keywords:
  - phantomjs
  - DOM with phantomjs
  - phandom
  - github phantomjs
  - phantomjs unit tests
  - java
---

I created [phandom](https://github.com/yegor256/phandom) a few months ago,
but yesterday finally found the time to make some needed changes to it.
So, now is a good time to
explain how I'm using Phandom in some of my unit tests.

Before I get started, though, I should say a few words about
[`phantomjs`](http://phantomjs.org/), which is a
JavaScript interface for WebKit. WebKit, on the other hand, is a web browser without
a user interface. WebKit is a C++ library that enables manipulation of
HTML content, through DOM calls. For example, this is a simple JavaScript
located code in `example.js`:

```javascript
var page = require('webpage').create();
page.open(
  'http://google.com',
  function() {
    console.log('loaded!');
    phantom.exit(0);
  }
);
```

We run `phantomjs` from the command line with the following code:

```bash
$ phantomjs example.js
```

PhantomJS creates a `page` object (provided by
[webpage](https://github.com/ariya/phantomjs/wiki/API-Reference-WebPage) module
inside `phantomjs`), and then asks it to `open()` a Web page. The object
communicates with WebKit and converts this call into DOM instructions. After
which, the page loads. The PhantomJS engine then terminates on line 6.

<!--more-->

WebKit renders a web page with all necessary components such as CSS,
JavaScript, ActionScript, etc, just as any standard Web browser would.

So far so good, and this is the traditional way of using PhantomJS. Now, on to
giving you an idea of how [Phandom](https://github.com/yegor256/phandom) (which stands for
"PhantomJS DOM") works inside Java unit tests:

To test this, let's give `phantomjs` an HTML page and ask him to render it. When
the page is ready, we'll ask `phantomjs` to show us how this HTML looks in WebKit.
If we see the elements we need and desire,---we're good to go. Let's use
the following example:

```java
import com.rexsl.test.XhtmlMatchers;
import org.hamcrest.MatcherAssert;
import org.phandom.Phandom;
public class DocumentTest {
  @Test
  public void rendersValidHtml() {
    Document doc = new Document();
    // This is the method we're testing. It is supposed
    // to return a valid HTML without broken JavaScript
    // and with all required HTML elements.
    String html = doc.html();
    MatcherAssert.assertThat(
      XhtmlMatchers.xhtml(new Phandom(html).dom()),
      XhtmlMatchers.hasXPath("//p[.='Hello, world!']")
    );
  }
}
```

When we use the above code, here is what happens. First, we get HTML `html` as a `String`
from `doc` object, and then pass it to
`Phandom` as an argument. Then,
on line 13, we call the `Phandom.dom()` method to get an instance
of the class `org.w3c.dom.Document`.

If our HTML contains any broken JavaScript code, method `dom()` produces a runtime
exception and the unit test fail. If HTML is clean and WebKit is able to
render it without problems, the test passes.

I'm using this mechanism in a few different projects,and it works quite well. Therefore, I highly recommend it.

Of course, you shouldn't forget that you must have `phantomjs` installed on your
build machine. In order to avoid unit test failures when
`phantomjs` is not available or present, I've created the following supplementary method:

```java
public class DocumentTest {
  @Test
  public void rendersValidHtml() {
    Assume.assumeTrue(Phandom.installed());
    // the rest of the unit test method body...
  }
}
```

Enjoy and feel free to report any bugs or problems you encounter to:
[GitHub issues](https://github.com/yegor256/phandom/issues)
