---
layout: post
title: "Object-Oriented Java Adapter of Amazon S3"
date: 2014-05-20
tags: amazon s3 java
description:
  jcabi-s3 is an object-oriented Java adapter of
  Amazon S3 that simplifies basic read/write operations
keywords:
  - amazon s3 java
  - s3 java
  - amazon java object-oriented
  - object-oriented java s3
  - s3 adapter java
---

I'm a big fan of Amazon Web Services (AWS). I'm using them in almost
every project I'm working with. One of their most popular services is
[Simple Storage Service (S3)](http://aws.amazon.com/s3/). It is
a storage of binary objects (files) with unique names, accessible through
HTTP or RESTful API.

Usage scenario of S3 is very simple. You create a "bucket" with a unique name,
upload your "object" into the bucket through their web interface
or through RESTful API, then download it, again, either through HTTP
or the API.

Amazon ships [Java SDK](https://aws.amazon.com/sdkforjava/)
that wraps their RESTful API. However, this SDK is not object-oriented at all.
It is purely imperative and procedural, it just mirrors the API.
For example, in order to download an existing object `doc.txt` from bucket `test-1`
you should do something like:

{% highlight java %}
AWSCredentials creds = new BasicAWSCredentials(key, secret);
AmazonS3 aws = new AmazonS3Client(creds);
S3Object obj = aws.getObject(
  new GetObjectRequest("test-1", "doc.txt")
);
InputStream input = obj.getObjectContent();
String content = IOUtils.toString(input, "UTF-8");
input.close();
{% endhighlight %}

As always, procedural programming has its inevitable disadvantages.
To overcome them all I designed [jcabi-s3](http://s3.jcabi.com),
a small object-oriented adapter of Amazon SDK. This is how the
same object reading task can be accomplished with
[jcabi-s3](http://s3.jcabi.com):

{% highlight java %}
Region region = new Region.Simple(key, secret);
Bucket bucket = region.bucket("test-1");
Ocket ocket = bucket.ocket("doc.txt");
String content = new Ocket.Text(ocket).read();
{% endhighlight %}

Why this approach is better? Well, there are a number of obvious
advantages.


